is that the destination user may not agree, for policy or performance reasons, to establish a connection with the initiating user at this time. In this case, the destination user responds to the Connect.indication primitive by a Disconnect.request primitive that contains a parameter to indicate why the connection has been refused. The service provider will then deliver a Disconnect.indication primitive to inform the initiating user. A second reason is when the service provider is unable to reach the destination user. This might happen because the destination user is not currently attached to the network or due to congestion. In these Chapter . Introduction Saylor URL: http: www.saylor.org courses cs402 The Saylor Foundation Computer Networking : Principles, Protocols and Practice, Release Source Provider Destination Time CONNECT.request CONNECT.indication CONNECT.confirm CONNECT.response Source considers connection open Destination considersconnection open Figure : Connection establishment cases, the service provider responds to the Connect.request with a Disconnect.indication primitive whose reason parameter contains additional information about the failure of the connection. Source Provider Destination Time CONNECT.request CONNECT.indication DISCONNECT.indication DISCONNECT.request Connection rejected by provider Connection rejected by destination CONNECT.request DISCONNECT.indication Figure : Two types of rejection for a connection establishment attempt Once the connection has been established, the service provider supplies two data streams to the communicating users. The rst data stream can be used by the initiating user to send SDUs. The second data stream allows the responding user to send SDUs to the initiating user. The data streams can be organised in different ways. A rst organisation is the message-mode transfer. With the message-mode transfer, the service provider guarantees that one and only one Data.indication will be delivered to the endpoint of the data stream for each