Data.indication primitives. At this . Services and protocols Saylor URL: http: www.saylor.org courses cs402 The Saylor Foundation Computer Networking : Principles, Protocols and Practice, Release point, all data has been delivered and the two streams have been released successfully and the connection is completely closed. Source Provider Destination Time DATA.request("A") Source - Destination connection closed Connection opened Connection opened DATA.request("B") DATA.request("C") DATA.indication("A") DATA.indication("B")DISCONNECT.req(graceful) DISCONNECT.ind(graceful) DATA.indication("C") DATA.indication("D")DATA.request("D") DISCONNECT.ind(graceful)DISC O NNECT.req(graceful) Connection closed Connection closed Figure : Graceful connection release Note: Reliability of the connection-oriented service An important point to note about the connection-oriented service is its reliability. A connection-oriented service can only guarantee the correct delivery of all SDUs provided that the connection has been released gracefully. This implies that while the connection is active, there is no guarantee for the actual delivery of the SDUs exchanged as the connection may need to be released abruptly at any time. The reference models Given the growing complexity of computer networks, during the 1970s network researchers proposed various reference models to facilitate the description of network protocols and services. Of these, the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model Zimmermann80 was probably the most in uential. It served as the basis for the standardisation work performed within the ISO to develop global computer network standards. The reference model that we use in this book can be considered as a simpli ed version of the OSI reference model4. The ve layers reference model Our reference model is divided into ve layers, as shown in the gure below. Starting from the bottom, the rst layer is the Physical layer. Two communicating devices are linked through a physical medium. This physical medium is used to transfer an electrical