first edition: Blythe Samuels, David Wisneski, and Stephen Rose. They found errors, made many great suggestions, and helped make the book much better. Likewise, we thank Marc Loy for his thorough review of the O Reilly Media second edition. He contributed many corrections, insights, and clarifications. PREFACE xiii Many students have given exceptional feedback, including Ian Staton, Tanner Wernecke, Jacob Green, Rasha Abuhantash, Nick Duncan, Kylie Davidson, Shirley Jiang, Elena Trafton, Jennifer Gregorio, and Azeem Mufti. Other contributors who found one or more typos: Stijn Debrouwere, Guy Driesen, Andai Velican, Chris Kuszmaul, Daniel Kurikesu, Josh Donath, Rens Findhammer, Elisa Abedrapo, Yousef Ba Afif, Bruce Hill, Matt Underwood, Isaac Sultan, Dan Rice, Robert Beard, Daniel Pierce, Michael Giftthaler, Chris Fox, Min Zeng, Markus Geuss, Mauricio Gonzalez, Enrico Sartirana, Kasem Satitwiwat, Jason Miller, Kevin Molloy, Cory Culbertson, Will Crawford, Shawn Brenneman, Tom Nguyen, and Ala-Uddin Mohammad. If you have additional comments or ideas about the text, please send them to: feedback greenteapress.com. Allen Downey and Chris Mayfield xiv PREFACE Chapter Computer Programming The goal of this book is to teach you to think like a computer scientist. This way of thinking combines some of the best features of mathematics, engineering, and natural science. Like mathematicians, computer scientists use formal languages to denote ideas specifically, computations. Like engineers, they design things, assembling components into systems and evaluating trade-offs among alternatives. And like scientists, they observe the behavior of complex systems, form hypotheses, and test predictions. An important skill for a computer scientist isproblem solving. It involves theabilitytoformulateproblems, thinkcreativelyaboutsolutions, andexpress solutions clearly and accurately. As it turns out, the process of learning to program computers is an excellent opportunity to develop problem-solving skills. On