iscompiled inacompiler, source code isprocessed by aprogram called preprocessor .This process iscalled preprocessing . Commands used inpreprocessor are called preprocessor directives and they begin with symbol . The main function ofthe Cpreprocessor istoremove comments from the source code and interpret preprocessor directives which aregiven bythe statements that begin with . The include statement can either becalled with include file.h orwith include file.h The first method tells thepreprocessor tolook forthefileinthestandard include directories . The second method, which uses thequotes, tells thepreprocessor that the filetobeincluded isinthelocal directory . - Compilation of C Program Continued Chapter : Introduction to C Language Compiler The compiler translates the C code into assembly language, which is a machine level code that contains instructions. Converted assembly language code having extension .s . Assembler Assembler translates the assembly language code into machine language. Converted code having extension .o (Object file) - Compilation of C Program Continued Chapter : Introduction to C Language Linker The object filehello .ocontains abinary version ofthe machine language that was created from your source code hello .c.Inorder tocreate the executable hello ora.out,you need touse thelinker toprocess your main function . Inexample, weused the printf function .The printf function isastandard function that isprovided bythe Ccompiler that your current object file knows nothing about . Inorder touse this function, weneed touse thelinker inorder tolink our program with theprecompiled libraries provided tousbythe Ccompiler . The linker links other precompiled object files orlibraries together and creates theexecutable hello . - Compilation of C Program Continued Chapter : Introduction to C Language - Compiler Interpreter Chapter : Introduction to C Language Chapter : Introduction to C Language - Procedural Oriented Programming (POP) A program in aprocedural language isalist ofinstruction