[SOURCE: B.Tech CS Materials] UNIT : INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER HARDWAREICT Workshop Topics to be Discussed Definition of Computer Computer Hardware Software Firmware History of Computer Classification of Computer What is A Computer? An electronic machine device that manipulates information , ordata . Ability to store ,retrieve , and process data . Input -Process -Output Capable of solving problem or manipulating data by accepting data Performing mathematical or logical operations on data. Supplying the result of these operations as output.Input Process Output Storage Communication Speed Quick performance quick data input and information retrieval. Storage Capacity Ability to store data. Accuracy Computer is programmed, so whatever input we give it gives result accurately. No IQ Computer does not work without instruction. Versatility Perform completely different type of work at the same time.Characteristics of Computer The Components of A Computer Input Device : Itisahardware usetoenter data and instructions . Converts the data into machine - readable form i.ebinary form . Output Device : Itisahardware that conveys information totheuser. Converts the electronic data produced bythecomputer system . The Components of A Computer System Unit : Box-like case containing electronic components used toprocess data. Pocessor, Memory, Adaptar Cards, Ports, Power Supply What is Hardware? Hardware represents thephysical and tangible components ofacomputer i.e.the components thatcanbeseen andtouched . Examples : Input devices --keyboard, mouse etc. Output devices --printer, monitor etc. Secondary storage devices --Hard disk, CD, DVD etc. Internal components --CPU, motherboard, RAM etc. Monitor Acomputer monitor isanelectronic device that shows pictures .Monitors often look similar totelevisions . There arethree types ofcomputer displays : .CRT monitor (Cathode Ray Tube) .LCD monitor (Liquid Crystal Display) .Video Projectors CPU ACentral Processing Unit (CPU) isa component indigital Computer that interprets