----Chas richest collection ofdata types(int,float,char), operators(symbolic representation) and inbuilt functions . .Stuctured Approach ----Cprovide the fundamental control flow constructions required for well structured program like statement grouping, decision making(if -else),switch -case, break etc. . Portable ----Chas the characteristics ofportability .Portable means computer independent .The programs made in Conone computer can be run ondifferent computers bynotchanging anything . .Case Sensitive ----Case Sensitive means that almost everything in C program iswritten insmall case . - Characteristics of C Continued Chapter : Introduction to C Language .Easily Available and Quick ----The Ccompiler are very easily available and require very less disk space . TURBO Cisthecompiler which isvery easy toload inyour computer . . Modular ----Modular means the programs can beeasily divided into small modules with theuse offunctions . . Easy Error detection Whenever wecompile theprogram after typing it inthe editor, the errors are immediately displayed on the screen pointing totheline numbers where they areactually coming . .Availability ofrecursive function ----This help ustoreduce thewriting ofdefinition offunctions bycalling same function again and again reduce the lines ofcodes aswell and areeasy toremember . Structure of CProgram1- Basic Structure of C Program Chapter - : Introduction to C Language Structure of CProgram1- Basic Structure of C Program Chapter : Introduction to C Language return successful execution Pre-Processor Directive : Pre-Processor Directives tells the compiler toinclude Input Output information foryour program . Preprocessor directives start with include copies afileinto thesource code include system Filename Eg. include stdio .h Standard Input Output include math .h Advanced Math Function( eg.Trignometry ) include conio .h Console Input Output include stdlib .h Arithmetic and Sorting Searching1- Basic Structure of C Program Continued.. Chapter : Introduction to C Language The define directive Itisapreprocessor